# Discussion

We have presented an in-depth analysis of the distribution of geneic G4s in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. As demonstrated by other groups, we found the levels of potential three tetrad G4s in Arabidopsis are low compared to the number of two tetrad PG4s (Mullen et al. 2010). Our analysis also shows that Arabidopsis genes have high levels of template stranded PG4 sequences, both in the 5' UTR and in the start codon proximal end of the CDS. These levels constitute an enrichment over what would be expected in random sequence with identical GC content and dinucleotide frequencies, and random sequences which could encode the same protein. Furthermore, we show that many G4s are fully or partially hardcoded by protein sequence, suggesting that in some cases protein sequence might be influenced by the G4 forming potential of the DNA. It is unclear how much the ability of different codons to form G4s has affected the evolution of the codon table. Poly-glycine and poly-proline motifs, which induce PG4s on the coding and template strands respectively, were found to account for a large number of Arabidopsis CDS PG4s.

Our microarray and RNAseq datasets have shown reproducibly that treatment of Arabidopsis with the G4 stabilising ligand NMM causes widespread changes in gene expression. Genes which contain template stranded two tetrad G4s in their 5' UTRs and CDS regions tended to be downregulated by NMM treatment. Genes with coding strand G4s in the gene body were not as strongly affected, indicating a potential mechanism involving the template strand. Since the template, or non-transcribed, strand is the one scanned by Pol II during transcription, we hypothesised that stabilised G4s on the template strand may form blockages that prevent the elongation of PolII, whilst coding strand G4s will not. We found that large numbers of clustered PG4s in a 200bp window were also indicative of reduced expression, suggesting that clusters of stabilised G4s are more problematic to Pol II than single G4s. Furthermore, analysis of publicly available Pol II ChIP-chip data (Chodvarupu et al. 2012) suggests that PG4 dense genes have altered Pol II profiles, with greater Pol II density at the TSS proximal end of genes and lower Pol II density at the TSS distal gene. We suggest that this is indicative of a slowing or pausing of Pol II over G4 dense regions of the gene. We did not see higher ratios of reads originating from nascent to mature mRNAs on PG4 dense genes, however, suggesting that this slowing does not naturally result in premature termination or degradation.